
Boot Process:

Boot Process - Is the steps that a computer takes to start up (boot)

 Preboot Execution Environment PXE
Optional, used for remote booting / network boot
Bootstrap phase
The first phase of the linux boot process
Responsible for testing and bringing the hardware up
BIOS & UEFI / POST which are what actually Initialize the hardware, and loading the bootloader / handing control to the bootloader  


Bootloader (ex. GRUB2)
Loads the OS and prepares the system
Loads Initial RAM disc, and kernel at the same time

Initial RAM Disk (initrd)
Essential drivers and tools are loaded to RAM, before switching to the real room filesystem
A temp file system 

Kernel
The core of the OS, managing system resources 
The brain of the system that talks to the actual hardware 
Initialize hardware, with drivers and such
Mounts the real root filesystem

Steps that PXE NIC to boot

The NIC starts up / activates 
DHCP Request - The NIC requests IP from DHCP Server
TFTP Server Location - The DHCP server gives where the NIC can find the TFTP server that has the boot files on it
Boot Files Transfer from the TFTP server to the computer
The Bootloader is executed to load the OS


Bootloader - Is responsible for loading the OS by selecting and launching the Linux Kernel

Computer Starts - Firmware (BIOS / UEFI) hands control over to GRUB2 (ie. bootloader)
GRUB2 Displays boot menu - the user then selects the OS or kernel they want to boot into
GRUB2 reads configs - Loads /boot/grub/grub.cfg, which is a file that instructs the computer on how to display the boot menu, and how to load the kernel and initrd. It contains a bash script that defines menu items, set colors, set boot timeouts, and define partition locations. 
GRUB2 loads initrd and kernel - Loads the initrd and the selected kernel at the same time, and initrd then prepares the system for booting.

Administrators might want to modify the GRUB2 setting, to do that you can edit the /etc/default/grub file and then you use the update-grub command to actually put the new setting in place.

Initial RAM Disk (initrd.img) - A temporary root filesystem that is loaded into memory / RAM before the real root filesystem is mounted. 

Contains essential drivers and kernel modules, and tools needed to initialize hardware and prepare the system for booting. 
	
Example: On a system with an encrypted root partition it would go like the following

First boot sequence starts

The Initrd and Kernel are both loaded

Initrd file contains the encryption modules needed to unlock the disk / encryption keys

At the same time the kernel is loading the storage controllers, disc encryption modules, or file system drivers are available. 

* This is important because systems with USB drives, encrypted discs, or specialized hardware that the kernel cannot directly access at boot time. 

Then it prepares the root filesystem in initrd 

Then it transitions from the temporary file system located in RAM to the kernel mounted file system. 

Initrd typically located in /boot/initrd.img 
Admins can create or update it using tools like mkinitramfs or dracut 
Kernel - The core of the OS that manages hardware, processes, memory, and system resources.

Kernel Process 

Kernel Initializes System
Detects Hardware
Mounts Root Filesystem
Starts Essential Processes

Making changes to Kernel

Adjust Kernel behavior with sysctl - allows admins to modify kernel parameters at runtime (will only apply once at runtime not permanent). 	Parameters that control various system functions like networking, memory management, and security settings. 

To make permanent changes to linux kernel - you have to edit the etc/sysctl.conf file

Apply the changes made to the etc/sysctl.conf file with sysctl -p command

Example: (To enable IP forwarding)
This allows the system to permanently route network traffic between interfaces, PC act like router  

Add - net.ipv4.ip_forward=1  to /etc/sysctl.conf 
And apply using sysctl -p  
